Experiment – 1
Aim – Basics of OS.
Introduction:
An operating system acts as an intermediary between the user of a computer and
computer hardware. The purpose of an operating system is to provide an
environment in which a user can execute programs conveniently and efficiently.
An operating system is software that manages computer hardware. The hardware
must provide appropriate mechanisms to ensure the correct operation of the
computer system and to prevent user programs from interfering with the proper
operation of the system.
An operating system is concerned with the allocation of resources and services, such
as memory, processors, devices, and information.
Tasks of OS:
Memory Management -
The operating system manages the Primary Memory or Main Memory. Main memory
is fast storage and it can be accessed directly by the CPU. For a program to be
executed, it should be first loaded in the main memory. An operating system
manages the allocation and deallocation of the memory to various processes.
Processor Management -
In a multi-programming environment, the OS decides the order in which processes
have access to the processor, and how much processing time each process has. This
function of OS is called process scheduling.
An operating system manages the processors work by allocating various jobs to it
and ensuring that each process receives enough time from the processor to function
properly.
Device Management -
An OS manages device communication via its respective drivers. It performs the
following activities for device management. Keeps track of all devices connected to
the system. designates a program responsible for every device known as the
Input/Output controller.
A file system is organized into directories for efficient or easy navigation and usage.
An OS keeps track of information regarding the creation, deletion, transfer, copy, and
storage of files in an organized way.
File Management -
A file system is organized into directories for efficient or easy navigation and usage.
These directories may contain other directories and other files.
An Operating System carries out the following file management activities. It keeps
track of where information is stored, user access settings, the status of every file, and
more. These facilities are collectively known as the file system.
Booting the Computer -
The process of starting or restarting the computer is known as booting. If the
computer is switched off completely and if turned on then it is called cold booting.
Warm booting is a process of using the operating system to restart the computer.
TYPES OF OS:
1. Batch Operating System -
This type of operating system does not interact with the computer directly. There is
an operator which takes similar jobs having the same requirement and groups them
into batches. It is the responsibility of the operator to sort jobs with similar needs.
2. Multi-Programming Operating System -
Multiprogramming operating system can be simply illustrated as more than one
program is present in the main memory and any one of them can be kept in
execution. This is basically used for better execution of resources.
3. Multi-Processing Operating System -
Multiprocessing operating system is a type of Operating System in which more than
one CPU is used for the execution of resources. It betters the throughput of the
System.
4. Multi-Tasking Operating System –
Multitasking Operating System is simply a multiprogramming Operating System with
having facility of a Round-Robin Scheduling Algorithm. It can run multiple programs
simultaneously.
5. Time-Sharing Operating Systems -
Each task is given some time to execute so that all the tasks work smoothly. Each user
gets the time of the CPU as they use a single system. These systems are also known
as Multitasking Systems.
6. Distributed Operating System -
These types of operating system is a recent advancement in the world of computer
technology and are being widely accepted all over the world and, that too, at a great
pace. Various autonomous interconnected computers communicate with each other
using a shared communication network independent systems possess their own
memory unit and CPU.
7. Network Operating System -
These systems run on a server and provide the capability to manage data, users,
groups, security, applications, and other networking functions. These types of
operating systems allow shared access to files, printers, security, applications, and
other networking functions over a small private network.
8. Real-Time Operating System -
These types of OSs serve real-time systems. The time interval required To process
and respond to inputs is very small. This time interval is called response time. Real
time systems are used when there are times requirements that are very strict like
missile systems, robots, etc.
ARCHITECTURE OF LAYERED OS:
This type of operating system was created as an improvement over the early
monolithic systems. The operating system is split into various layers in the layered
operating system, and each of the layers has different functionalities.
A particular layer can access all the layers present below it, but it cannot access
them. That is, layern-1 can access all the layers from n-2 to 0, but it cannot access the
nth Layer 0 deals with allocating the processes, switching between processes when
interruptions occur or the timer expires.
There are six layers in the layered operating system. Layered Structure of Operating
System Hardware: This layer interacts with the system hardware and coordinates with
all the peripheral devices used, such as a printer, mouse, keyboard, scanner, etc.
These types of hardware devices are managed in the hardware layer.
• CPU Scheduling: This layer deals with scheduling the processes for the CPU.
Many scheduling queues are used to handle processes. When the processes
enter the system, they are put into the job queue. The processes that are ready
to execute in the main memory are kept in the ready queue. This layer is
responsible for managing how many processes will be allocated to the CPU and
how many will stay out of the CPU.
• Memory Management: Memory management deals with memory and moving
processes from disk to primary memory for execution and back again. This is
handled by the third layer of the operating system. All memory management is
associated with this layer. There are various types of memories in the computer
like RAM, ROM.
• Process Management: This layer is responsible for managing the processes, i.e.,
assigning the processor to a process and deciding how many processes will
stay in the waiting schedule. The priority of the processes is also managed in
this layer. The different algorithms used for process scheduling are FCFS (first
come, first served), SJF (shortest job first), priority scheduling, round-robin
scheduling, etc.
• I/O Buffer: I/O devices are very important in computer systems. They provide
users with the means of interacting with the system. This layer handles the
buffers for the I/O devices and makes sure that they work correctly.
• User Programs: This is the highest layer in the layered operating system. This
layer deals with the many user programs and applications that run in an
operating system, such as word processors, games, browsers, etc. You can also
call this an application layer because it is concerned with application programs.
